[Page 1]
CONTENTS
Preface ...........................................................................................................................................................6
About the Author ..........................................................................................................................................8
Foreword.......................................................................................................................................................9
1 PRINCIPLES OF COACHING ............................................................................................................11
2 PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING...............................................................................................................45
3 PRINCIPLES OF PERFORMANCE .....................................................................................................55
4 SETTING GOALS...................................................................................................................................63
5 PHYSICAL PREPARATION .................................................................................................................81
6 TRAINING METHODS AND EXERCISES .......................................................................................89
7 FOOTWORK TRAINING......................................................................................................................103
8 ASPECTS OF AN INDIVIDUAL LESSON.........................................................................................113
9 PSYCHOLOGICAL PREPARATION ...................................................................................................145
10 PREPARING FOR BEST PERFORMANCE .....................................................................................155
11 TACTICS.................................................................................................................................................161
12 COACHING DURING COMPETITION ............................................................................................183
13 THIS IS TEAM FENCING! ..................................................................................................................195
14 PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS..............................................................................................................201
15 CONCLUSION .......................................................................................................................................211
Glossary .....................................................................................................................................................214
Bibliography................................................................................................................................................220
Index...........................................................................................................................................................221

[Page 2]
1
PRINCIPLES
OF COACHING

Throughout my career, I have found it
helpful to support my coaching with
certain core principles. This chapter
details these principles, which I use as a starting
point when developing my students' funda-
mental fencing skills.

FEELING AND
CONTROLLING DISTANCE

Footwork controls everything: distance, timing
and scoring. There can never be enough foot-
work. When I came to Britain to coach in 1978
my first major focus was to improve footwork;
when that happened, results improved sig-
nificantly. The good thing about working on
footwork is the fencer can do it by themselves
and, as legs respond to training, the fencer is
rewarded by seeing and feeling the results.
Improving footwork includes the ability to move
at various speeds while maintaining the correct
position, so the fencer is ready to attack at any
moment with a strong lunge or flèche, can
change direction with minimum loss of time or
keep a particular distance (see Chapter 7).

Photo opposite by Niki Bruckner.
The James Bond connection!
Richard Kruse was an under-twenty fencer
and had nobody to train with; he would
come to the club in Highgate School
and just practise footwork on the metallic
piste. Incidentally, this was the piste used
in the James Bond movie Die Another Day,
very kindly given to us by Leon Paul.

In fencing, distance is the most fundamental
factor affecting winning hits. In training (especially
in lessons) and competitions, coaches should help
fencers develop a feeling for distance.

[Page 12]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING
Dancing with wolves!
The famous sabreur Vladimir Nazlymov
told me that when he was in the Soviet
team, he used to practise footwork by
himself for three hours a week. Indeed,
Russian coaches and fencers compare the
mobility of fencers to wolves; both wolves
and fencers rely on the speed, strength
and stamina of their legs for reward
- food for wolves and medals for fencers.

Perfecting a feeling for distance is a con-
tinuous process and requires superb foot-
work and eye-leg coordination supported by
accurate anticipation. The timing of actions
is inseparable from feeling and judging the
correct distance.
Responsive legs are crucial in controlling
the distance, reacting in time, and moving at
various speeds - whether or not the fencer
is consciously aware of this. If a fencer delays
responding to the beginning of an opponent's
attack, the opponent's chances of scoring
will increase. Equally, when a fencer starts
an answering attack too late, their chances of
reaching the target diminishes. On the other
hand, if the answering attack starts too fast,
there is more chance of the counter-attack suc-
ceeding. Therefore, the first step forward of the
fencer who starts an answering attack cannot
be faster or longer than the first step back of
their adversary. It is important to control the
distance from the fencer whose attack finishes
short - if it is too close, the original attacker has
a good chance of succeeding with a counter-
attack against an answering attack.
Having responsive legs is critical as they help
improve control over the timing of actions, thus
decreasing the number of out-of-time responses.
The importance of distance is huge and
sometimes allows fencers to score hits just
with good footwork. Using distance against
an opponent's offensive action can be called
defence with distance or shah-put. It is par-
ticularly apparent in sabre and is increasingly
used in foil.
In a fight, the distance changes constantly.
Fencers are advised to fight for 'their' distance
which varies according to their own physique.
The task of a tall fencer is to keep the distance
long, while a shorter fencer will try to close
the distance.
There are five types of distance: close-quar-
ters, riposting, lunging, step-lunging, and
long. The 'distance' in fencing can refer to the
distance between targets and also from the
point of the weapon to the target. Tochka
is a Russian term referring to the change of
distance that happens when, or just before,
a fencer tries to hit. The opponent will often
change this distance very late, therefore the
fencer must be ready to cope with this change
and adjust their hitting action.
When a fencer is about to hit, their opponent
can stand still, move back or move forward.
In these cases, the fencer can hit by medium
tochka (lunge), long tochka (step-lunge), or
short tochka (hitting with just the arm). The spe-
cific hitting action is particular to each fencer,
tochka refers specifically to the challenge of
anticipating and adjusting to late changes in
distance just before hitting the opponent.
12

[Page 13]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

Riposting distance is hitting with only a fully extended arm, in a perfectly balanced position. This enables the
fencer to transition to the next movement with minimal delay. (Photo: Kevin Nixon)

Lunging distance is hitting with a fully extended arm on a full lunge. (Photo: Kevin Nixon)

It is important to anticipate not only what
action an opponent will choose when threat-
ened, but how they will try to change the
distance in critical moments.
Just as coaches should mix their defensive
strokes as a fencer tries to hit, they should also
change the distance, encouraging the fencer
to anticipate and adapt to both.
13

[Page 14]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING
Foil and sabre
In my opinion even the world's top foil-
ists can improve their footwork, akin to
the world's top sabreurs (such as Áron
Szilágyi (HUN)) who lose their positions
less often in the heat of the fight.

Fencers should search for a natural on-
guard position to facilitate maximum mobil-
ity and balance. It should give a fencer the
quickest change of direction, with the ability
to control rhythm and speed. It should also
be a position which facilitates the execution
of a lunge or flèche with minimum delay. It is
often the case that a fencer could have scored
if their position had been correct. In the heat of
the bout, many fencers lose the position from
which to launch an effective offensive action.
Those fencers who are able to maintain their
position are better placed to succeed.
As every fencer has a unique physique, dif-
ferent positions will suit different people; gen-
erally fencers should sit lower and wider with
the bulk of their weight on the balls of the feet.

Longer distance in offence and
shorter in defence

Fencers have a tendency to come too close
when preparing their attacks and to move
too far away when defending their oppo-
nent's attacks; consequently they receive too
many hits by counter-attacks or attacks. When
defending, a shorter distance gives more
opportunities to capitalize on any mistakes
made by the fencer who is pressing forward.
Some fencers tend to keep a longer distance
while retreating because they feel safer. Such
feelings are false as the opponent has more
freedom to prepare their attack while gaining
more speed. Thus, the distance in defence
should be such that the fencer who is advanc-
ing feels under pressure.
On the other hand, the reason for getting
too close while pressing is a strong desire
to hit, using a faster and longer step to get
momentum for the attack while the oppo-
nent strives to stay close while retreating.
Coaches should pay close attention and regu-
larly remind fencers about their distance.

Closer distance – shorter steps

Fencers have a tendency to make their steps
too long, and therefore become exposed to
counter-attacks. They should develop the habit
of taking small steps, particularly while closing
the gap to the target. While making shorter
steps the fencer remains further away from
the opponent and is able to change direction
earlier as their steps are more frequent. As
previously mentioned, a wide on-guard posi-
tion helps develop this habit. If the size of steps
differs, it will affect distance.

Feeling for distance

It is quite common for less experienced fencers
to make too big a step forward on the coach's
step back and get too close. Correcting this is
one way of developing a feeling for distance.
For that reason, it is useful if coach's steps back
are small.

Closer distance - wider weapon
movements

At a longer distance, a fencer can make very
small movements of the point in order to avoid
an opponent's blade. But, at close distance, the
guard and arm are in the way so the point move-
ment has to be wider. Similarly, avoiding octave
at close distance can be executed with a smaller
movement than when avoiding seconde (2).
Also parries taken at a longer distance can be
smaller than parries taken at close quarters.
14

[Page 15]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

RIGHT: On-guard while advancing. The upright
position while advancing is the most suitable, as it
provides the best control of the point for the attack
and readiness to defend with change of direction.
(Photo: Kevin Nixon)

To hit at close-quarters
the hand often has to travel some
distance in order for the point to land, similar
to a bear hug, or a scoop. Bear hug and
scoop refers to the position where the sword
arm is the farthest away from the target in
order for the point to make contact (reminis-
cent of the beginning of a friendly bear hug).
The blade movement is rounded to increase
the chances of contact.

Leaning forwards while moving
backwards - staying upright
while advancing

While moving backwards a fencer has to be ready
to change direction at any moment and be close
enough to find the blade or hit with a stop hit. The
best position is leaning forwards while moving
backwards. When moving forwards, a fencer is
better off
keeping an
upright position; this
offers more control of the
weapon, more power to lunge and it
makes it easier to change direction.

Move as if on a railway line, not
a bumpy road

It is better for a fencer to move smoothly
forwards and backwards, as this limits an
opponent's opportunity to attack. Fencers

RIGHT: On-guard while retreating. When retreating,
lean forward while threatening an opponent with
the point, as this provides instant readiness to
defend and change direction. (Photo: Kevin Nixon)
15

[Page 16]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING
who move too much vertically are giving their
opponents more time to hit. This is because
while a fencer is airborne they are unable to
move until they are back in contact with the
piste. Of course, the element of surprise can
make ripostes while high in the air very effec-
tive; airborne ripostes are rare but should
be encouraged as they can be spectacular.
Some fencers like bouncy footwork, but
their bounces should have small amplitude
and high frequency. An advantage of bounc-
ing is that it is harder for an opponent to notice
the beginning of any real actions, thus deceiv-
ing the opponent and creating the element
of surprise and impact; the disadvantage is
vulnerability while in the air.
There is much merit in a seated lesson when
the legs are completely relaxed, as the fencer's
entire attention is on their hand whilst their
legs are disengaged. Thus, the strength, speed
and accuracy of the hand can be improved
quickly. Additionally, the muscles of the back
are more relaxed, enabling the arm move-
ments to be freer. Such lessons are also useful
when there is a leg injury. Even in a seated
lesson, the coach can vary the distance.

REACTING IN TIME

Actions 'in time' can be defined as movements
synchronized with those of the opponent. The
above description refers mainly to the physical
side of timing. However, there is also a psycho-
logical side of timing - choosing the action and
the moment the opponent least expects for an
attack. Accurately reading the intentions of the
opponent is important to achieve surprise.

An airborne riposte positions the fencer higher than the opponent, opening up the upper target area – ideal
for flicking and hitting the shoulder or back. This also elevates the fencer's target, making it harder to be hit
by the opponent. (Photo: Kevin Nixon)
16

[Page 17]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

A sitting down lesson completely disengages legs from the action, enabling total focus on the sword arm. It is
an excellent method to improve technique, speed and accuracy. (Photo: Kevin Nixon)

Coaches and fencers should pay attention
to initiating and finishing foot and weapon
movements in time, as only then do they have
a chance to win or avoid the hit.
A feeling for time can be improved with prac-
tice; musical fencers have an easier task here. A
feeling for time, like distance, is most important
in fencing and it is crucial to have good footwork
to be able to develop it. From the beginning,
coaches should encourage fencers to perform
actions in time – during lessons, exercises in
pairs, training bouts and competitions.
There are four key areas where timing is vital:
1. Starting and finishing attacks
2. When to parry
3. Direct or indirect hits
4. Making compound actions.
Starting and finishing attacks

The most effective time for an attack is on
preparation, when the opponent's foot just
begins to move forward, so the attack arrives
no later than the moment when the oppo-
nent's foot lands; this requires acute judge-
ment to anticipate the difference between the
beginning of a preparation and the beginning
of an attack. Sharp perception is required, as is
the ability to read pre-signals, or 'tells', which
are often subtle. Experience is the best way to
develop this sense of judgement - very experi-
enced fencers can even fake tells. Such skill and
experience is particularly valuable in situations
where priority is in question.
The second most effective time for an attack
is immediately after the opponent pauses or
17

[Page 18]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING
finishes their development of an offensive
action; this can be called an answering attack'
or 'taking back the initiative'. There could be
various reasons for an opponent to stop, such
as their blade being found, not being sure how
to finish their attack, or they may even pause in
order to provoke an answering attack from the
fencer. Here reading the opponent's intention
is crucial.
The third attacking situation is when the
fencer is advancing and looking for the moment
to finish after getting within lunging distance to
the opponent; this involves more risk as oppo-
nents often seek to draw such an attack in order
to respond to it, particularly while having space
behind them to retreat into.
The timing of attacks can also be deter-
mined by the movement of the opponent's
weapon. While defending, an opponent will
open and close various targets by moving their
weapon; a fencer must finish in a particular
sector in time - not after, but as an opponent
is in the process of opening it. In a lesson the
coach, while making various openings, can
usually tell if a fencer finishes an attack too
early, or too late, because the fencer's blade
will be parried by the coach.
The coach can feel how much time there
is to defend and what chance the fencer's
attack has of succeeding. Ultimately, for more
advanced fencers the coach should not simply
wait for an offensive action to reach the open
target, but ensure the fencer is hitting in time.

When to parry

The best time to parry is either at the first
moment (usually by beating or parrying with
a step forward) or at the last moment when
an opponent finishes an offensive action
(usually with holding parries and riposting
along a closed line to avoid being hit by
renewals). At such moments it is particularly
hard for an attacker to deceive the parries.
Parries in the first moment are usually less
expected and their beating nature towards
the opponent's blade make them harder to
deceive. Parries at the last moment are hard
to deceive as they are taken right at the end
of the attack when it is usually too late for an
opponent to change line.

Direct and indirect hits

The timing of hitting with a direct riposte or
direct attack (particularly an answering one)
should be such that the fencer starts an offen-
sive action before their opponent starts a defen-
sive one because the fencer's point will arrive
at the target before the opponent can parry.
On the other hand, when making a simple
disengage riposte or attack, it is best to start as
the opponent begins a simple parry. The coach
should always try to parry or avoid being hit
and, if the timing is correct the hit should land,
giving the fencer accurate feedback.

Compound actions

When a fencer wants to hit with a compound
riposte or attack, in the case of a second-
intention action they need to induce the
opponent to react to the parry and wait until
their reaction begins. Compound actions
can be premeditated first-intention, in which
case the fencer does a deep feint assuming
the opponent will react in a habitual way,
favouring a certain parry or counter-attack.
Such a feint can also be synchronized with
a back foot movement (completing a step
forward) and the subsequent disengage will
hit if the timing is right, but if the reaction
of the opponent is unexpected, the fencer
will have to switch to a continuation (either
counter-parry or renewal).
18

[Page 19]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING
Expected and unexpected

Against an unexpected or sudden action, an
opponent usually reacts in a particular, habit-
ual way. Against an expected action, an oppo-
nent may react differently. Knowing how an
opponent reacts to an unexpected action is
useful for winning hits. Among premeditated,
compound first-intention actions, a feint cut-
over is very effective as it avoids most typical
parries.
The timing for a stop hit is the moment
when an opponent takes their point away
from the target area. The stop hit should arrive
before the opponent's point starts moving
towards the target.

Reacting in time also applies to
foot actions

Simply by following a coach's steps, a fencer
should react as quickly after the beginning of the
coach's movement as possible. According to
Turecki, the time taken from the moment of
initiating an attack to the moment the fencer is in
a retreat is around 400 microseconds, which is
enough time to avoid being hit if the attack is
from a slightly longer than lunging distance.
However, the execution time of the retreat will
depend on whether the fencer must change
direction, and at what speed they are already
moving. Obviously, fencers who are defending
have to constantly make decisions between
moving back, parrying or counter-attacking
and any hesitation can give an opponent time
to hit. Any exercises which involve changes of
direction or keeping the distance are useful.
The principle of reacting in time also applies
to blade and point movements. For instance,
a fencer should avoid an opponent's blade at
the moment it travels across the target in such
a way that the fencer's blade stays in line with
the target. Fencers often move their point from
the target area while deceiving; they can also
mis-time the moment the point makes contact
with the target; both should be corrected. For
instance, the ideal flèche attack would have the
point reaching the target at the end of the pro-
pulsion force from the front leg at a 45-degree
angle and just before the end of the arm
extension. Ultimately, the coach should not
wait for the fencer's point to arrive but parry or
take the target away if it is late.

FEELING FOR THE
POINT; HITTING WITH
ACCELERATION

The best tactics and the best frame of mind are
useless if a fencer cannot hit. Therefore, the
simple ability to control the point and hit with
optimal strength is fundamentally important.
The fencer who wants to be successful has to
have a feeling for where the point is and what
it is doing.
In fencing, the most important thing is
to hit the target accurately. To achieve this a
fencer has to know and feel where the point is
as well as the target.
Ideally, a fencer should have a good aware-
ness of the position of their point in relation
to the opponent's target. Usually, a fencer's
feeling for the blade does not extend all the
way to the point. Over time, a fencer's feeling
for the blade will extend up along the blade,
eventually including the point. When a fencer
has a good feeling for where their point is, they
are usually fencing at their best.
Generally, there is a tendency to grip the
weapon too tightly and hit too hard while

The point!
The Italians have a saying, pensa alla
punta, which means 'think about the
point'. In Poland coaches often call the
point the 'rifle sight' through which the
opponent's target is observed.

[Page 11]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

Holding foil with two fingers, back view. There
is a general tendency with all fencers to hold the
weapon too firmly, which then limits the ability to
manipulate the foil. This exercise of holding the
foil with two fingers is an excellent way to restore a
lighter grip. (Photo: Dawn Uhalley)

Holding foil with two fingers, front view. Place the
last three fingers on the guard and hold the grip
with the thumb and index finger. This leads to
greater point control and accuracy with small finger
movements. (Photo: Dawn Uhalley)

throwing the point rather than leading it.
In order to get a better feel for directing the
point and hitting correctly, the coach may ask
a fencer during hitting practice to hold the
weapon only with the index finger and thumb,
while keeping the other three fingers on the
outside part of the guard. The index finger
is naturally used for pointing at things and
therefore plays an important role in directing
the point.
Almost every movement of the weapon
should be initiated by the point, particularly
when taking parries. An opponent sees the

guard moving more easily than the point,
therefore it will be harder for the opponent to
deceive a parry when there is no movement of
the guard in relation to the point. Therefore,
all beating parries with the point and guard
moving along the same line are effective, as
well as circular and semi-circular parries when
it is mainly the point moving. When hitting
the outside sectors in the case of same-hander
fencers from a low Muhammad Ali position
when the point moves upwards, an opponent
will see the movement later than if the whole
arm is moving. Likewise, beats and engage-
ments are harder to avoid if they are executed
mainly by moving the point of the weapon.
However, feints are more visible and effective if
a target is threatened from different line posi-
tions with a clear sideways movement of the
guard and additional body movements.
The most effective way of moving the point
is when the pivoting point is just in front of
the fingers. Finger play combined with exten-
sions of elbow give the best combination
for maximum acceleration and speed of point
movements in any direction. Whenever the
shoulder starts to move, the point travels more
slowly and less accurately.

Independent and spaghetti arm
Ideally, the sword arm should be relaxed and
independent from the legs, able to hit any
target from any position at variable distance
and speed. A loose arm is faster than a tense
arm and coordination is better. It has more
power and the point can be accelerated more
easily. This can be achieved by working on
lunging pads, practising during lessons, par-
ticipating in pairs exercises, training bouts and
competitions with a focus on keeping a loose
arm. Fencers and coaches should actively seek
the best position of the sword arm to facilitate
maximum power and speed of the point.
Many exercises from the Muhammad Ali posi-
tion come in handy here, as it necessitates a

20

[Page 12]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

loose arm. Even when taking parries, fencers
should try to keep their arm relaxed, giving
them the feeling of a more powerful riposte
than a tense one. A loose arm will be more
accurate, particularly when using the fingers
and optimal strength of grip. Developing the
habit of accelerating the point increases the
chances of winning hits.

Mace and chain
I like to compare a fencer's arm to a mace and
chain. The mace is the hand and the arm is the
chain. In general, we want to develop a sword
arm that is independent of the legs according

to the classical formula that in offence the arm
moves before the legs, and in defence, the legs
move before the arm. However, there are some
useful coordination points of fencing actions
between arm and leg movements, such as:
*   Feint or beat synchronized with the back
    foot landing.
*   Extension of the arm synchronized with the
    back foot landing.
*   Parry with step forward synchronized with
    the front foot landing.
*   Engagement of the blade synchronized
    with the front foot landing (ideally the
    point should start moving slightly before
    the foot).

Relax!
Just like working on perfecting the lunge or any other movement, relaxation of the arm is a
continuous process goal. Muscles often involuntarily contract and this occurs throughout
a fencer's career. Keeping the feet moving up and down (mashing grapes exercise) helps
relax the upper body.
Coaches and fencers must always pay attention to the quality of hitting (optimal
strength and perpendicular position) and to leading of the point rather than throwing
(or pushing). Sometimes, coaches and fencers should not be satisfied
with just any contact with the target, but should strive to hit cor-
rectly every time. This will result in greater accuracy, and a higher
number of scoring hits in matches.
The ability to hit the target accurately is a huge part of tech-
nique. Using the fingers and having a relaxed
and independent arm is a process goal which
contributes significantly towards accuracy. Off-
target lights are not just unlucky, they are directly
related to a fencer's ability to hit the target accurately.
This can be easily measured by comparing the number
of hits on target with right of way, to the total number of
off-target and on-target hits in time. To simplify
measurements, do not include out of time actions.
This index of accuracy usually varies between 40
per cent and 70 per cent, although better fencers
can achieve a higher score; James Davis (GBR) often
reaches over 80 per cent.
Correct hitting occurs when the point comes into contact, perpendicular
to the target area, with optimal strength causing the blade to bend several
centimetres. (Photo: Kevin Nixon)

21

[Page 13]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

Generally, accuracy depends on balance and
correct position. Small rotating movements of
the hips, vertically or laterally, can significantly
affect the direction of the point. The back hip
should stay level with the front hip, especially
during a lunge. Small involuntary movements
of the wrist, or tension in the shoulder can also
induce wayward movement of the point.
Ideally, a fencer should retain accuracy, even
if they are off-balance, which can occur during
a fight. Fencers should be aware of the need to
keep a loose arm (particularly the shoulder).

On target
In the 2004 World Cup, Cassara (ITA)
fencing Ferrari (FRA) placed every hit on
target, a rare event.

Accuracy
One way of concentrating on accuracy
with younger fencers, is for fencers to
perform one press-up for every off-
target hit. This is regularly used by
the US National Coach Greg Massialas
during practice.
There are numerous accuracy tests,
among them: one fencer moves 2 metres
forwards and backwards often changing
the hand position, while their partner
randomly opens a gloved hand at
various distances. The task of the fencer
is to hit the palm of the hand as quickly
as possible using optimum strength,
adequate footwork and a fully extended
but relaxed arm. Minimum number of
attempts 3 x 10, calculating results as
follows: very good 25-30, good 20-25,
average 15-20, poor 10-15. There are
two basic ways of hitting: placing the
point and flicking.

In lessons all exercises from a low hand posi-
tion help, because the arm has to be loose.
Initiating actions from a low position auto-
matically relaxes the sword arm and disconcerts
opponents who like to take the blade. Practising
lunging pad exercises from a low line position
helps with relaxation and adds to the variety of
positions from which it is desirable to develop
accuracy.

A speeding bullet
In Olympic sports, the point of a foil has
been named the second fastest object
after a bullet, because of flicking.

A fencer's performance should be built on
the fundamental ability to lead and place the
point. Flicking is more of a lottery and is easier
for taller fencers - Chamley-Watson (USA) is
a good example. If a particular fencer scores
frequently with flicks, it is worth practising
them in lessons, but only after classical hitting
is ingrained. Also, it is useful to automatically
add another movement immediately after a
flick hit, in case the flick does not work.

FEELING FOR THE BLADE
In foil, a feeling for the opponent's blade plays
a more important role than in other weapons.
Since a tactile reaction is faster than a visual one,
a feeling for the opponent's blade is particularly
relevant when there is little time to make a deci-
sion, and a fencer must react to the contact - or
lack of contact - with an opponent's blade.
Coaches should introduce exercises to
develop this skill; for example, a fencer engages
the coach's blade and if the coach reacts early
the fencer deceives two parries and if late, only
one, but if there are no parries or reaction the
fencer has a longer contact with the blade and
finishes direct. Similarly, when a fencer takes

22

[Page 14]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

a holding parry, the riposte will depend on
a feeling for the blade. Exercises with closed
eyes are very effective in developing that feel.
Other exercises can develop explosiveness; when
a fencer reacts to a lack of touch with a direct
thrust from engagement. Also, reflex responses
to a beat with a change beat or engagement
are based on a sense of touch and are often exe-
cuted automatically as a result of control from
the lower parts of the nervous system.

DIRECTING THE POINT
AWAY FROM THE TARGET
AT A LONG DISTANCE
AND TOWARDS THE
TARGET WHEN THE
DISTANCE IS CLOSING
This is an important principle to help fencers
become more effective. It is common for fencers
to take their point away from the target as the
distance is closing, increasing the chances of a
successful counter-attack against them.
A fear of being parried is the reason for this;
however, the answer is for the fencer to keep
a longer distance while preparing an attack,

TALIA
Baldini (ITA) - Auclin (FRA). In the 2015 San Jose Grand Prix, Auclin in this particular moment has not applied
the classic principle of keeping the point on target and receives a hit from Baldini. (Photo: Dawn Uhalley)

23

[Page 15]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

whilst constantly improving the ability to go
round an opponent's parries and to retake
the right of way while being parried. Fencers
should consider being parried as an opportu-
nity to score with a counter-riposte, renewal,
counter-attack or defence with distance.
This principle is logical - at a longer dis-
tance an opponent needs more time to hit,
so there is time to bring the point on target;
time diminishes as the distance decreases. It
is important to have the hand independent
of the legs while anticipating the correct dis-
tance, to enable the hand to deliver the hit
irrespective of what the legs are doing. Fencers
with better anticipation and coordination can
bring the point on target later and still be
successful; this often results in hitting the
target with an arm still bent. Obviously, the
speed of moving forwards is relevant as at
higher speeds, while keeping the point away,
the chances of a successful counter-attack are
higher than at lower speeds. It is therefore
important to develop the ability to press
slowly. Pressing slowly with an absence of
blade is difficult to deal with but also difficult
to do while maintaining the ability to finish in
time against a counter-attack or parry.

Coping with pressing
To cope with such pressing a fencer has the
following options:
*   Going for near-simultaneous actions and
    trying to be in a position to press.
*   After a feint attack closing the distance
    with a sweeping parry or Romanian.
*   Using the line as a deterrent or for any
    actions (derobement, parry, attack,
    counter-attack).
*   Making numerous feint attacks or counter-
    attacks and taking the risk of trying to hit
    after one of them with Romanian forwards
    or backwards (alternatively, waiting for
    an opponent to react to the feint and

depending on the nature of the reaction
performing an adequate counter-action
- either attack, parry-riposte or counter-
attack; there might be a case for simple
beat attack if the opponent does not
respond to the feint).
*   Offering the blade and trying to hit
    afterwards with a counter-parry-riposte
    or Romanian, depending on the character
    of the opponent's movement (Romanian
    forwards is usually against a faster
    movement and backwards against a
    slower one).
*   Keeping the distance without reacting
    until the opponent decides to hit and
    then trying to parry at the last moment
    - this requires a high level of control and
    confidence in taking parries.
*   Suddenly increasing and decreasing the
    distance to open one sector of the target
    and thus force the opponent to finish into
    the opening, then parry and hit at close
    quarters.
*   Constantly breaking the distance,
    encouraging the opponent to finish when
    the distance is closing and parry, or move
    faster when the distance is increasing and
    Romanian.

Sometimes at close-quarters a fencer, after
taking a parry, withdraws the hand and moves
the point away as the opponent tries to protect
their target with the weapon and by wriggling
the target area. This exceptional situation can
only work if the opponent is very defensive
and taking the sword arm away is the only way
at close-quarters to land the point.
However, keeping the point on target is the
fundamental principle of thrusting weapons
and particularly important when the distance
is closing. Fencing actions are often executed
extremely fast; if the point moves out of line
with the quickly moving target as well as the
opponent's weapon, there might not be time
to hit again. A fencer should always feel where
the point is in relation to the target. Keeping

24

[Page 16]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

First phase of Romanian - hit. The key to a successful Romanian is to hit and parry in one swift movement.
The ideal condition for a Romanian is when the opponent (in this case the coach) is moving quickly forward
while taking the point away from the target, at medium or short distance. When presented with these
conditions a fencer has a good chance of success. Here the fencer is responding with a swift hit which is the
first phase of the Romanian. (Photo: Kevin Nixon)

Second phase of Romanian - parry. In the second phase the fencer follows the swift hit with a parry.

[Page 17]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

the point on target has become a little under-
appreciated in recent times, but in my opinion,
it is a fundamental principle of fencing.

STRONG BASIC
FOUNDATION
The importance of a strong basic founda-
tion is particularly relevant when a fencer is
under significant pressure, short of time and
distance. Fencers with a stronger basic foun-
dation will have more chance of maintaining
the correct positions and movements and will
therefore have more chance of winning.
It is important to drill into fencers the habit
of adopting:
*   a solid on-guard position;
*   a strong lunge or flèche;
*   balanced movements;
*   correct weapon and body positions.

On-guard position
In the on-guard position, the fencer should be
sitting low, so the plumb line from the knee ends
at least where the toes begin, with the bulk of the
weight on the balls of the feet. The feet should be
shoulder-width distance apart, the elbow of the
sword arm should be one hand's width in front
of the front hip bone, and the sword forearm in
line with front leg knee and toes.

Strong lunge or flèche
Every successful fencer has to have a good attack,
which means building up a strong lunge.
However, a good flèche can be a useful
addition to the lunge. For instance, the
Austrian fencer Joachim Wendt naturally had
tense muscles and a rather short, ineffective
lunge; he therefore developed a very effective
strong flèche. The Soviet Elena Belova, from
the former republic of Belarus, before one
important tournament, injured her hip and
was unable to lunge; she won by using an
effective flèche.

A good lunge is characterized by a fully
extended arm, hips, shoulders, sword arm
and front thigh parallel to the ground,
while the back leg is extended and the back
arm is parallel to the back leg.
(Photo: Kevin Nixon)

26

[Page 18]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

In the first phase
of a flèche, start by
extending the sword
arm, followed by
pushing from the
back leg in order to
transfer weight to the
front leg from where
the energy for the
flèche comes from.
(Photo: Niki
Bruckner)

For the second
phase, the hit is
delivered in the final
push from the front
leg. The vector of
force from the front
leg is approximately
45 degrees to
the ground.
(Photo: Niki
Bruckner)

Balanced movements
Sometimes a fencer's unbalanced position
gives an opponent the opportunity to score
while preventing a fencer from hitting with
a lunge or flèche; by the time balance is
regained it is usually too late. The same
thing applies to riposting. Therefore a fencer
should always be ready to immediately
lunge, even while engaged in changes of
direction at high speed.

Correct weapon and body
positions
Coaches teaching a solid basic foundation
need to remember the importance of fixing the
correct position at the beginning as well as at
the end of a movement. Since every movement
starts from a particular position, it is imperative
that the movement and position be correct
at the end; if they are not, then the movement
itself cannot be correct.

27

[Page 19]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

Another area to give a fencer a solid founda-
tion is developing the ability to make a smooth
transition from one movement to another should
a situation rapidly change. For example, a
fencer executes a direct thrust with a step
forward: from time to time the coach increases
the distance and takes a parry; the fencer fin-
ishes the step forward and deceives the parry
with a smooth transition to another foot action
(step or lunge depending on distance). A fencer
practises a prime parry and riposte by flicking to
shoulder. From time to time the coach defends
the shoulder and the fencer makes a smooth
transition by riposting to flank or chest.

Remember!
Almost every movement should start
with the point.

Developing maximum efficiency of move-
ments is key to a solid foundation, as this is
the most accurate and easiest way of control-
ling speed and rhythm. Moreover, efficient
movements need less energy and are better
disguised; in other words, opponents see them
later than the ones requiring greater effort.
As our nervous system registers movements
of different speeds coaches should teach the
execution of movements with the right rhythm
and maximum acceleration, while maintaining
high intensity. Developing a habit of accel-
erating the final movement of the point is
also important as this gives a fencer more
chance of scoring the hit. Acceleration comes
mainly from the movement of the sword arm
(shooting with the arm), and this should be
independent of the legs. Acquiring a habit of
slower and shorter steps forward is another
part of building a solid foundation.

DAVIS
GER
Salon (GBR) losing balance against Davis (GBR). Salon on the left is losing his balance. Most likely, Salon was
surprised by Davis and responded by pushing from the front leg. (Photo: Dawn Uhalley)

28

[Page 20]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

Responsive legs
An active back leg controlling distance while
moving backwards is very important. It is
common to see fencers who are taken by
surprise and have to rapidly move back,
leaning backwards while pushing back with
the front leg. This happens when there is
too much weight on the front leg; the front
leg responds first with a strong push and
the legs cross - this is often the only way to
avoid being hit, but it is very hard to make
any actions forward.

Fundamental aspects for
a solid foundation
*   Make small preparation steps and weapon
    movements while keeping the point on
    target when closing distance.
*   Maintain optimal strength of hitting and
    directing the point with the fingers rather
    than throwing it with the arm.

The situation can arise, often at crucial
moments, when a poorly directed point
bounces off the target without triggering the
light, therefore practice of the above is critical.

SLOW BEGINNING
The principle of beginning slowly has emerged
because many attacks on preparation and
counter-attacks are successful. A lack of control
over speed is often caused by a strong desire to
hit the target and since young fencers tend
to rush more than the older ones there is a
high percentage of successful counter-attacks
among the younger age groups.
Moving the point away from the target
while getting closer is because of a fear of
being parried and is an important reason
why an opponent's counter-attacks succeed.
Steps are often too long, which is what suits

Did you know?
In the early stages of a competition, there
are more counter-attacks than in the later
stages as fencers are more anxious and
consequently more reactive.

the counter-attacker. There are other reasons
why fencers start too quickly when preparing
attacks. Other than a pure desire to hit, a lack
of explosiveness in the legs results in the fencer
needing fast steps to get enough momen-
tum to achieve a desirable speed for the final
lunge or flèche. Beginning more slowly helps
a fencer switch to a parry and contributes
towards a greater change of speed and hence
a greater chance to hit.
Therefore developing a habit of beginning
slowly is very important, but at the same time
difficult as it is not instinctive.

Vary the speed
It is useful in some footwork sessions to
completely eliminate fast steps forward
and only move at a variable speed,
including maximum speed backwards
and only slow steps forward.

There is also merit in introducing Avola
steps forward, meaning starting a step
forward with the back leg and sometimes
developing an attack from it. Such a sequence
is quite natural with complete beginners.
Also, advocating a wider on-guard position
compels a fencer to do smaller steps and
hence develop this important habit. This prin-
ciple is more relevant for fencers with a long
reach than shorter fencers, who have to be
more dynamic and often do a patinando.

29

It appears there are pages missing from the provided scans. The images you've shared cover pages 11-20 of the "PRINCIPLES OF COACHING" chapter, and then jump to pages 35-43 from "PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING".

Therefore, I cannot transcribe pages 21-30 as the corresponding images were not provided. Please provide the missing scans for pages 21-34 to fulfill your request.

[Page 31]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

COMBINING
TECHNIQUE, TACTICS
AND PSYCHOLOGY

an arrow. This can be achieved by lowering the
legs while rotating the trunk and moving the
head and sword arm back; when the moment
comes to strike, the movement of the weapon
can be accelerated considerably taking cumu-
lative power from the legs, trunk and sword
arm - like an arrow being shot from a bow.

The right frame of mind is critical to a fencer's
performance as it can affect every aspect –
technique, coordination, thinking and even
muscle control. Tension, both mental and
physical, affects accuracy and the ability to
think clearly; being relaxed helps concentra-
tion, precision and coordination.

Bow and arrow

Fencers like Chamley-Watson (USA) and
Choi (KOR) sometimes use this tech-
nique while executing a flèche attack.
Although it looks risky, the preparatory
movements of trunk, arm and legs may
invite an opponent to react in a way
that makes them more vulnerable to the
attack. If an opponent's reaction is to
counter-attack, then doing a beat from
such a position is effective or finishing
the final movement still in time. Among
younger fencers, we can see this princi-
ple emerging in Shikine's (JPN) fencing.
This technique gives the weapon the
most power and acceleration.

Power of the mind

Without doubt the mind can be a powerful
tool to enhance performance and fencers
must learn to control it from an early stage.
For example Tofalides' (CYP) mind is his
greatest weapon.

Therefore correct warm-up routines are helpful
to reach the right frame of mind. It is important for
the coach to know a fencer well. If a fencer feels in
a warm-up lesson their point is hitting correctly
and they can execute actions well, such feel-
ings have a positive effect on a fencer's mindset.
Equally, if they know how to fence a particular
opponent, this can boost confidence. The wrong
mindset can ruin tactical thinking and coordina-
tion, and consequently timing, technique and
accuracy, thus causing catastrophic results.

COACHING AGAINST
LEFT- AND RIGHT-
HANDEDNESS

Although right-handedness is more common,
in fencing there is a relatively high percent-
age of left-handers. Fencing them is different
because of the different relationship between
blades and the curve of the target; coaches
should, therefore, give lessons with both hands.
Some coaches give lessons with a weapon
in each hand and randomly change hands,
adding to the level of difficulty in training. Using
a French grip in a lesson allows the coach to
change hands more easily, which is more effec-
tive than giving one lesson left-handed and
another right-handed. Of course, sometimes a
coach will work on a specific left-handed oppo-
nent for the whole lesson.

BALANCE

Balance is another attribute of technique. It
is obvious that having good balance is an
advantage as it makes a fencer able to change
from one situation to another quickly, giving
more power to execute any action and it
offers greater control in delivering the hit.
A lower and wider on-guard position gives
better balance and provides optimum mobil-
ity. Generally, fencers do not sit low enough
and do not use their back leg enough.

40

[Page 32]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

Off balance

It is also important to practise being
effective while off balance, as this can
happen in a fight.

EXPLOIT TACTICAL
VAGUENESS

Applying this principle can create confusion
in an opponent's mind as to what action to
take and therefore cause a delay in reaction.
The aim is to create a situation to encour-
age attack as much as defence. For instance,
Cassara's preparation in the quarte (4) line in
one sense threatens the chest but at the same
time encourages a counter-attack in the sixte
(6) line. Another example is a feint in the low
line with little extension, so an opponent is in
two minds whether to attack in the high line or
take a low-line parry.
Often pressing slowly with various actions
on the blade draws an opponent's attack on
preparation but at the same time threatens an
attack. The fencer who does this is ready to
parry if an opponent attacks early but often
switches to the attack if an opponent hesitates,
delays or just begins to initiate.

Vagueness

Yet another example could be a partly
extended sword arm which may create
uncertainty in the opponent's mind as
to whether this is in line or not. Peter
Joppich (GER) often prepares his actions
(often a parry but could be attack or
even counter-attack) from such a vague
hand position. Situations like this can
make an opponent react more slowly
and less decisively, hence there is more
chance to win the hit.

INDIVIDUALITY

It is important, particularly in the later stages
of development, to maximize a fencer's
strengths. There are many fencers who are
successful because their strong natural style
has been developed. For example, those with
less explosiveness will rely more on changes in
timing than speed.

EFFICIENCY

Some fencers seem to score hits with ease while
others use too many muscles in moving, which
affects coordination and accuracy. Forcing hits is
not only inefficient but also ineffective. Fencers
should aim to develop efficient movements as
this usually has a positive effect on timing and
winning the hits as it helps with coordination,
deceptiveness and overall effectiveness. Coaches
should encourage fencers to focus on lightness
of execution, optimal muscular involvement and
of course small and accurate movements. From
time to time reminders such as, 'Do not crush
the bird' or 'spaghetti arm' are useful. Generally,
shorter fencers have to do more work to score
than fencers with a longer reach.

CENTRAL LINE –
LINING UP WITH THE
OPPONENT

Right of way is important, but it means nothing
if you don't actually hit your opponent. The
central line is a hypothetical line created when
the fencer lines up not only their point, but
also their whole body, with the middle of the
opponent's target. The middle of the opponent's
target is not necessarily the middle of their chest,
but the centre of the target as it appears to
the fencer. Usually this will be in the middle of
the breast of the fencing arm, but of course, it
changes as the opponent moves their body.

41

[Page 33]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

Fencer and coach in
line. Fencers should
not only line-up
with opponents but
should also practise
this is in training.
This gives fencers an
accurate bearing of
where the central line
is and any movement
out of line can be
more accurate.
(Photo: Kevin Nixon)

Awareness of how to create and maintain
this central line with the opponent's target
helps a great deal with accuracy. It also aids
the fencer in defence, as it gives them a useful
bearing should they wish to avoid the oppo-
nent's attack. If a fencer's point is on target, but
the rest of their body is orientated elsewhere,
they have a higher chance of missing. Also, any
rotation in the hips may move a fencer out of
line, badly affecting accuracy.
When one fencer lines up with the other,
the probability of hitting on target increases;
this is, therefore, a useful principle to apply.
Coaches should encourage fencers to get a feel
for the central line as early as possible, and to

use it to their advantage. In lessons, coaches
should continually check that their fencer is
lining up with them correctly.
Some fencers deliberately move to the side
of the piste to disrupt the feeling for the centre
line. It is up to their adversary to maintain the
line-up by moving accordingly.

SECOND-INTENTION

Coaches should create second-intention situ-
ations in lessons, in addition to encouraging
fencers to do so in fights. The fencer who can
make their opponent react and take advantage

Lining up

In the 2015 European Championships during a match for GB against Italy, Garozzo (ITA) tried to
move out of line with Kruse (GBR) in between hits. Kruse continued to readjust before each hit
and line up correctly with the Italian. Kruse remained accurate throughout the match.
Sometimes both fencers apply this principle and line up with each other. One example
is the 1984 Olympic Men's Foil Final between Mauro Numa (ITA) and Matthias Behr (GER).
Both fencers maintained perfect central lines during the entire match.
The 2018 Shanghai Grand Prix Final between Kruse (GBR) and Safin (RUS) had a par-
ticularly wide piste. The fencers appeared to be out of line as they stuck to opposite edges
of the piste. However, closer inspection would reveal both of them were rotating their
bodies to line up with each other diagonally. They were both respecting the principle of the
central line, despite not being in line in relation to the piste.

42

[Page 34]
PRINCIPLES OF COACHING

of it is in a stronger position. Any movement
making an opponent parry, attack or counter-
attack should be perfected. It is of huge impor-
tance to see the difference between a false and
a real action, as reacting to a false action will
help an opponent to score.

ATTENTION TO DETAIL

The difference between winning and losing
can often be very small, therefore small differ-
ences can mean winning the hits. Those differ-
ences may apply to many areas. For example,
the way of executing certain fencing actions
such as beat attack: it can be much more
effective to execute a beat on an opponent's
blade later, during the extension of the beating
fencer's arm, rather than before the extension.

Other examples might be spotting the differ-
ence between the beginning of a false counter-
attack and a real one, between a false beat and
a real one, between the beginning of prepara-
tion and an attack, and many more.

ATHLETES' NEEDS
FIRST

The nature of coaching requires the needs of
athletes to always be put first. A coach should
forget about ego and do everything in their
power to help a fencer to develop their game.
There may be situations where a coach's per-
sonal ambition can hinder a fencer's further
development. This would be in conflict with
the ultimate purpose of coaching which is to
help a fencer get better.

Opening
in high line. Here we see second intention by drawing the opponent's
...hile being ready to parry and riposte. Any
Kevin Nixon)

[Page 35]
PRINCIPLES
OF TRAINING

t is impossible to produce successful
fencers without a comprehensive training
programme. In this chapter, there is a list
of all the principles that relate to planning the
best possible programme.

PERIODIZATION

Just as in nature, every human activity is cyclical.
How training is planned depends on the calen-
dar of competitions and qualifying events but,
more importantly, on the timing of the main
competitions: Zonal, World Championships or
Olympic Games. Periodization – the long-term
cyclic structuring of training and practice to
maximize performance at important competi-
tions - is necessary, as it is simply impossible
to maintain a high level of performance during
the entire year.
The International Fencing Federation (FIE)
calendar for the senior circuit has the World
Championships finishing at the end of July with
qualifying competitions every month start-
ing in October with breaks in December and
April. The obvious rest period is for four weeks

immediately after the World Championships in
July: ideally, one week of passive rest and three
weeks of more or less active rest participat-
ing in various relaxing activities not requiring
fencing movements. The four-week rest period
is for healing injuries and improving health.
From the end of August, there are around
eight weeks before the first qualifying com-
petition in October followed by two further
qualifiers in November. These first three com-
petitions of the season are less important than
later ones and allow fencers to continue with
pre-season training, easing off for the periods
of competition.
This schedule before the first competition
in January allows around sixteen weeks of
training. The three weeks until mid-September
can be used mainly for physical preparation
mixing cardiovascular and strength exercises,
plus some lessons and footwork exercises
(footwork with weights is advisable).
From about mid-September to the first
week of October fencers should spend a lot of
time fencing (lessons, footwork, learning and
competitive bouts), doing physical work only
as maintenance, usually at the end of fencing
or on a separate day.
This activity should taper off before the first
competition in October and again in November,

Photo opposite by Chris Turner.

[Page 36]
PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING

2018 SEA Fencing Camp
16A 2015
Hortaon Village & Resort Chi

South East Asia pre-season fencing camp, one of the many pre-season fencing camps which takes place
around the world. (Photo: Jornnawat (P'Mod) Limprasert)

after which fencers should spend two weeks in
December on physical preparation with some
tactical analysis of recent competitions.
From the end of December, the number
of fights should increase and an international
training camp arranged if possible before the
January World Cup in Paris. It is good to have a
five- to six-day camp finishing four or five days
before the competition. The camp could be

arranged to finish two weeks before the event,
provided, however, that in the week after the
camp there is low volume, yet high-inten-
sity training. Low volume but high-intensity
training is advisable just before a competition
because it can facilitate a high quality of per-
formance without fatiguing the fencers.
In the competitive period, post-competition
micro-cycles should always include recovery

2018 SEA Fencing Camp

46

High-intensity training: sparring sessions at a pre-season training camp. (Photo: Paula Huckle)

[Page 37]
PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING

sessions. The character of successive micro-
cycles will depend on how much time there is
before the next competition. The focus of the
micro-cycles should be on strengths and things
to be improved. In a micro-cycle when the
maximum number of fights is required, a fencer
should expect to do the equivalent of just under
30 x 15-hit fights over five days – depending on
the standard of the opponents. (Tougher oppo-
nents then lower the number of fights.)
In building up towards the competition, it is
important to remember quality; if the quality
of fencing in training drops noticeably then a
period of rest or stopping completely should
be considered.
During the break from competition in April,
there should be a return to physical preparation
for about two weeks before progressing to more
competitive fights. Whenever possible, before

each competition, fencers should take part in an
international camp of five or six days' duration
finishing four or five days before the tourna-
ment. As mentioned above, such camps could
be arranged earlier, provided there is high-inten-
sity training the week after and a whole week for
tapering just before the competition.
Whenever there is a longer break between
competitions (at least six weeks), a similar
sequence can be repeated: around 20 per
cent of the time on rest and physical prepara-
tion, the next 20 per cent on more technical
work (lessons and footwork) while maintain-
ing strength and conditioning and 50 per
cent on tactical and competitive fencing with
a possible camp, tapering for the last 10 per
cent of time before competing. Richard Kruse
(GBR) often takes a whole week's rest before an
international competition.

Good preparation - Richard Kruse, Grand Prix 2016, Havana. Six-week build-up. Result - 1st

%age
100.00
75.00
50.00
25.00
0.00
-6.00
-5.00
-4.00
-3.00
-2.00
-1.00 Competition

• Percentage V15 during week
Weeks to Competition
No of 15s end of wk

71
90
84
29
25
21
100
100
2
100
Kruse had a six-week build-up to Havana, starting with a week of strength and conditioning and a complete
break from fencing. In week 5, lessons, footwork and some light fencing were initiated. Weeks 4, 3 and 2
saw competitive fights ranging from 21-29 fights per week achieving a victory rate of 90 per cent. The week
immediately before the competition fights reduced dramatically. Final result - Gold.

47

[Page 38]
PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING

Poor preparation - World Cup, St Petersburg, 2016. Six-week build-up. Result - L64

%age
100
91
82
81
80
78
75
50
25
0
-6.00
-5.00
-4.00
-3.00
-2.00
-1.00 Competition

Weeks to competition
No of 15s
• Percentage Victories

33
23
21
17
11
10
3

Preparation for St Petersburg was poor in comparison to Havana. Kruse was advised to start fencing from
the beginning of the six-week preparation period. This was too early and, consequently, he was unable to
maintain his form during the competition. Result - lost 64.

The graphs, above, show Richard Kruse's
training schedule and the impact of good
preparation to win the Grand Prix in Havana
schedule in 2016 and, for comparison, a poor
schedule before St Petersburg where Richard
was out in the final 64.
In order to find the best formula, each
fencer should keep a training diary detailing
the content of training (lesson length, foot-
work, number of fights with results) and relate
this to the result in the competition.

PENDULUM

The pendulum principle, as the name suggests,
applies to contrasting changes in training content.
Physical preparation can be alternated with
fencing, for instance, one week focusing on
strength and conditioning, the second on

fencing and so on. Or there can be a period
alternating between resting and hard training.
You can hit fencers with hard training followed
by several days of recovery to make them fresh,
as the body will overcompensate in its recov-
ery from hard training, before hitting them
again with hard training. Or alternate periods of
lessons, footwork and games with just fencing.
The pendulum approach is effective and worth
introducing in some periods of training, for
instance in the build-up to a major event.

INTENSITY

Training has to be as intensive as actual fights
in a competition; it brings training closer to the
feeling of a real competition. It is important to
remind fencers to maintain hard fencing, as
there is a danger of getting into the habit of
taking it easy. Fencers shouting after scoring

48

[Page 39]
PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING

hits in training like they would in a competition
is a good sign of intense training.
Here the cooperation of both players is
necessary. They have to push each other all
the time and constantly create challenges.
In competition, fencers must make decisions
under pressure and often operate in extreme
conditions. Only highly intensive training can
replicate that. The fencer who does not try is
wasting their time and that of their partner.
While taking a lesson, the fencer should
imagine performing against the strongest
opponent in the world; ideally in the lesson,
they see the fight they are getting ready for,
and in the fight, they see the lesson. In order to
maintain intensity, the lesson should be in the
region of 20-30 minutes' duration.
Squad training should also be intensive
and productive, to enable fencers to do a
lot in a relatively short period of time. When
squad sessions are extended, intensity drops,
as does speed and focus. Consequently,
fencers get a sense of wasting time, which is
no good for their morale. However, a fencer

should never pursue intensity at the expense
of quality; adequate rest between training
bouts is important.

ENDURANCE,
STRENGTH AND SPEED

In order to build up a fencer's form for a com-
petition, they must first do the mileage, which
means a large number of fights, long footwork
sessions and lessons. Weights can be intro-
duced during footwork (a weight jacket and
wristbands or small weights, rubber bands,
etc.). Also, plyometric exercises in a general
session are effective in building up strength,
plus weights in the gym at the end. Finally,
speed drills should be introduced while fencers
are fresh, with lots of maximum-frequency,
short-burst movements complementing coor-
dination and reaction drills.
While building up speed in lessons, the
coach should apply short (10-20 seconds)

2164

Building up speed. A camp where fencers are engaging in high-intensity bouts. (Photo: Chris Turner)

[Page 40]
PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING

maximum-intensity periods of work mixed
with periods of rest (around 30 seconds).
Obviously, the important components of
speed in fencing are sharp selective percep-
tion, anticipation and quick thinking.

WARMING UP AND
WARMING DOWN

This should be habitual for every athlete to
prevent injury. More advanced fencers warm
themselves up very effectively and they usually
develop their own personal routine. Usually,
fencers who thoroughly warm up and warm
down have fewer problems with injuries and
their training is more effective.

CHANGING THE
CONDITIONS OF
TRAINING – ALTERING
THE STIMULUS

It is important to regularly alter the conditions
of training; every coach should introduce some
changes to their pattern of lessons every year.
Examples include using the opposite hand,
footwork with weights or expander, shorter

Effective pair work

Sometimes two fencers can create effec-
tive changes with each other in training –
what I call effective pair work. In Britain,
Fiona McIntosh (GBR) worked extremely
well with Linda Strachan (GBR) and
Richard Kruse (GBR) was pushed hard
by Laurence Halsted (GBR) and later by
James Davis (GBR) and vice versa.

piste, shorter time, lower oxygen pressure,
anything which is different from the norm.
If the same stimulus is always applied, with
time it becomes less effective.
There is a limit as to how much can be
achieved simply by increasing the intensity
and number of fights. There have to be other
changes in order to make progress. These
changes can include a new composition of
exercises in lessons, new tasks in fencing,
limiting time and space during practice,
fencing with the opposite hand, footwork
with weights, fencing new opponents and
training at high altitude. Participating in
international training camps brings huge
stimulation to fencers.
Sometimes training can, in some ways
be harder than competition. In the past
fencers would be woken up at 3am to do

50

Legs apart against
the wall: one of
many stretching
exercises which
can be used during
warming down.
It is particularly
important to hold
this for at least a
minute to achieve the
maximum benefit.
(Photo: Kevin Nixon)

[Page 41]
PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING

fencing drills, or taken underwater to prac-
tise decision making and tactical thinking
(by Hungarian coaches Janos Kevey and
Laszlo Szepesi).

PRESSURE TRAINING
(WITH PENALTIES FOR
FAILURE)

Pressure training is when scoring is made
artificially hard and there are consequences
for failure or rewards for success. In pressure
training, all sorts of obstacles are created
for the fencers. For example, five hits in a
row or one minute at 4 metres, with three
burpees for every hit against them. Fencers
will become more confident by dealing with
these challenges.
Pressure training is equally good for individ-
uals and team matches. For instance, during
the first and last 30 seconds of a 3-minute
period, the opposite team scores double for
every single hit. And at any stage of the match,
the coach can change the score to add to the
pressure, the losing team having to do some
physical penalty.
Such training is linked to the principle of
changing stimulus, since adaptation to such a
stimulus should bring a change in the quality
of performance.

SPECIFICITY

'A snooker player will not get better at
snooker by running around the table.' This
statement accurately reflects the principle of
specificity in training: training should always
have a clear and precise goal, relevant to
fencing. At a senior level the correlation
between the results of general fitness tests
and fencing-specific fitness is rather weak
(Czajkowski). There are fencers whose results
in various general fitness tests are very good,

but they 'die' on the piste in direct elimi-
nation (DE) matches. The closer a training
session can get to the conditions a fencer will
experience in competition the better. Some
fencers use certain competitions for training,
which are usually (but not always) better
than training. However, even then there is
a difference in the standard of opponents,
the seriousness of their performance and
the atmosphere. For example, the Olympic
Games have a unique atmosphere, impossi-
ble to reproduce anywhere else. Sometimes
simulating the noise of a competition and
the crowd can be used during a session;
organizing VIP matches with foreign teams
and media involvement is one such way.
Again, participation in an international
camp with lots of fencers who are going to be
in a real competition makes training specific.

**Quality**
Fencers need to experience as high a
standard of fencing as possible. Fatigue
usually decreases quality, movements
become bigger, and reactions slow.

**QUALITY**

Fencers constantly need to push themselves
beyond their boundaries to improve. Therefore
the quality of their actions is important.
Maintaining a solid position and balanced
movements help. If one fencer raises their game,
it often lifts the standard of the others so there is
a chain of influence on the whole group.
In the immediate period of preparation
before a major event, if there is a drop in
quality during a session, it is better to take
a short break. If, after the break, there is no
improvement, the fencer should be advised to
stop the session completely.
Of course, fencers should try all sorts of
'tricks' to bring about a better performance,

51

[Page 42]
PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING

Leon Paul
London
Leon Paul
45 03:00 44
Take a break! Fencers taking time out from training. (Photo: Niki Bruckner)

maximum-intensity periods of work mixed
with periods of rest (around 30 seconds).
Obviously, the important components of
speed in fencing are sharp selective percep-
tion, anticipation and quick thinking.

WARMING UP AND
WARMING DOWN

This should be habitual for every athlete to
prevent injury. More advanced fencers warm
themselves up very effectively and they usually
develop their own personal routine. Usually,
fencers who thoroughly warm up and warm
down have fewer problems with injuries and
their training is more effective.

CHANGING THE
CONDITIONS OF
TRAINING - ALTERING
THE STIMULUS

It is important to regularly alter the conditions
of training; every coach should introduce some
changes to their pattern of lessons every year.
Examples include using the opposite hand,
footwork with weights or expander, shorter

**Effective pair work**
Sometimes two fencers can create effec-
tive changes with each other in training-
what I call effective pair work. In Britain,
Fiona McIntosh (GBR) worked extremely
well with Linda Strachan (GBR) and
Richard Kruse (GBR) was pushed hard
by Laurence Halsted (GBR) and later by
James Davis (GBR) and vice versa.

piste, shorter time, lower oxygen pressure,
anything which is different from the norm.
If the same stimulus is always applied, with
time it becomes less effective.
There is a limit as to how much can be
achieved simply by increasing the intensity
and number of fights. There have to be other
changes in order to make progress. These
changes can include a new composition of
exercises in lessons, new tasks in fencing,
limiting time and space during practice,
fencing with the opposite hand, footwork
with weights, fencing new opponents and
training at high altitude. Participating in
international training camps brings huge
stimulation to fencers.
Sometimes training can, in some ways
be harder than competition. In the past
fencers would be woken up at 3am to do

**Competition preparation**
Years of observation by coach and
fencer lead to the creation of the most
effective formula for building towards
a competition.

**TAPERING**

This important principle is part of periodi-
zation. When approaching a competition, a
fencer should significantly decrease the volume
of actions and increase quality and intensity
while focusing on their strengths. There has to

52

[Page 43]
PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING

an opponent, as well as a more accurate sense
of timing. The last hit is the most important
and the hardest; we often see a fencer who has
reached 14 points receiving some hits before
scoring his last one. In my opinion, we should
develop fencers whose focus on the last hit is
not any different than for any other hit in the
fight (although they do have more information
by this time). Every fencer and coach should
strive to achieve an increasingly strong perfor-
mance as the fight progresses.

**AN INTERDISCIPLINARY**
**APPROACH TO**
**TRAINING**
In modern sport, it is necessary to involve
specialists from fields other than fencing in the
training process. The services of sports psy-
chologists, physiotherapists, strength and con-
ditioning trainers, nutritionists, performance
analysts and others, such as yoga trainers, are
often used. These services should be under the
guidance of the fencing coach who is in charge
of a fencer's whole training process.

be adequate rest in order to reach the phase of
over-compensation, when the body reacts to
overtraining with better recovery. The speed
of mental and physical recovery varies with
fencers: some need four days of complete
rest and a short sharp lesson the day before a
competition; some need to stop for three days
and do nothing the day before; others may
be happy to train every second day during
a tapering period. There is no hard-and-fast
rule to the amount of tapering required. The
most important principle coaches and fencers
should apply is individualization of training,
teaching and learning.
On the last training camp before a major
event, fencers should have two short, sharp
sessions per day with short lessons where they
perform their favourite actions. Observing and
if possible monitoring an athlete's physical and
mental state prevents overtraining but may
sometimes lead to withdrawing them from a
particular session.

A STRONG FINISH TO
THE BOUT (END-GAME)

There is a tendency in all sports to work on a
strong finish, as athletes who can develop this
habit have more chances to win.
Coaches sometimes talk of finding another
gear. Even marathon runners sprint at the end
of their race. In fencing, it is more complicated,
but fencers and coaches have to find a way for
each individual to develop a habit of increas-
ing the intensity of a fight towards the end.
This should be practised among higher level
fencers. Here, some exercises from pressure
training are helpful: for example, when there is
limited time and space, the task is to produce
a certain number of hits or to alternate priority
in the fight with a very short time limit – for
example, 10 seconds per hit.
Towards the end of a fight, a fencer has
more information to work with: the experi-